---
title: Ergotron LX Wall Mount System Installed
date: 2008-07-21 01:00
categories: work
---

Well, it didn't take me long to decide that stand-up was the way to go. On
Saturday, I ordered the Ergotron LX Wall Mount System from Amazon and made good
use of my Amazon Prime membership to get it delivered this afternoon. I think it
got delivered around 2 PM and—several hours later—I've got it installed and have
my new workstation ready to go:

<!-- more -->

![Photo of installed Ergotron LX System
=300](/images/2008/07/ergotron-lx-wall-mount-system-installed/ergotron_lx_system_installed.jpg)

The Ergotron is a little difficult to get installed the first time you do it.
Even though I bought a "complete package" including the wall track, mounting
kit, CPU shelf, display arm and keyboard tray arm; the package did not include a
single, "master" set of directions.

When I opened the one large box that UPS dropped off, I was greeted by a
bazillion small boxes, cardboard envelopes and sealed, bubble-wrapped parts. Not
finding "the" instruction manual out loose, I proceeded to open the various
packages. Each one contained an instruction manual, but only for the part
contained in that box.

Particularly annoying was that there was no instructions detailing the suggested
heights at which to mount things. You can imagine my frustration when—after
getting everything assembled and finally putting the keyboard and monitor arms
in place—I realized I had mounted everything too high and needed to lower the
track by about 2 feet. Because of the way things are put together, I had to
completely undo everything and start from square one. At least I knew which of
the 5 or 6 different types of screws to use where the second time around.

Now that it's done, I'm really digging the setup. The nice thing about the arms
is that they have enough of a height-adjustment range that I can still bring
them down for those occasions where I want to sit in a chair. I managed to get
the keyboard arm mounted at the perfect height for that—at it's lowest position
it hovers just over my desk surface. I need to adjust the height of the monitor
arm a little, though. At its lowest, I have to look up at it a bit when sitting
down, and it goes higher than I need it to when standing. Since it's kind of a
pain to adjust the position of the plate on the track, I think I'll save that
for tomorrow.
