---
layout: post
title: Standing Up
date: 2008-07-21
comments: true
categories: workspace
---

I've succumbed to the influence of all the cool kids on the block and decided to
try out this "stand-up desk" thing.

Before committing to any purchases, I figured it would be a good idea to see if
I'd be able to—ahem—stand it at all, so right now I'm using a makeshift stand-up
desk consisting of putting my monitor on top of my stereo and a couple of books
and my keyboard and trackball are sitting on top of a big box and (the keyboard
at least) is also in top of some books.

<img src="/images/2008/07/standing-up/stand_up_desk_trial_1.jpg" width="300"/>

<!-- more -->

### Initial impressions: ###

#### Energy ####

It's definitely preventing me from feeling sleepy so far. Usually I start
feeling like I need a nap around 11 AM (hey, I start working by 6 AM most
days!), but I've not hit any such lethargy yet today. Of course, I slept in
today, so that's not necessarily a fair analysis. We'll see how it goes on
Monday.

#### Ergonomics ####

When you're used to sitting all day, standing in one place for any significant
amount of time feels like torture, because you're forced to use muscles that
have "gone soft". Already, after just a few hours, my core is feeling tired. In
reality, this is a good thing, since it shows that standing up is working as
advertised. Hopefully it becomes tolerable after a few days. After almost 10
years of sitting down all day, I imagine it will take quite a while for this to
really feel natural.

There are other ergonomic benefits besides just the core strength and spinal
posture. For one thing, my hand/wrist placement has automatically (and
comfortably) improved. When sitting at a desk, I could never tolerate the proper
typing position where the wrists are held straight and the arms lifted off the
table. This is partially due to the poor posture that I always have in a chair—I
was always supporting part of my weight on my forearms. Needless to say, My
wrists and hands had a tendency to ache at the end of the day.

When sitting in a chair, I also have a tendency to cross one leg under the
other. After a prolonged period, my whole leg would fall asleep. I can only
imagine that the decreased blood-flow can't be good for you. When standing up,
this obviously isn't an issue. That said, if you ever decide to try this for
yourself, I'll impart one bit of wisdom that I actually learned back when I was
a high school band-geek: keep your knees slightly bent and rely on your quads to
keep your legs standing. If you lock your knees, you'll be very uncomfortable
after just a few minutes and may even pass out. Also, a wider,
martial-arts-style stance will make you more stable and more comfortable.

#### Focus ####

So far, I've not felt the benefits of being able to focus on a task that others
have reported. Then again, I'm still messing with the "setup", experimenting
with what works best. Once I've settled, I'll be able to get a better idea on
that front.
