---
layout: post
title: 2008 Year-End Review
date: 2009-01-01
---

Wow! Just...wow!

I can't believe 2008 is already over. The older I get, the faster the years seem
to fly by; I'm not sure I like the trend. The effect mainly tells me that I need
to concentrate more on living my life intentionally, so that I have a better
memory of my everyday experiences.

<!-- more -->

That's not to say that I don't remember 2008â€”this has been a year of big changes
and lots of neat experiences. The year started off with a plan to take a job in
Dublin, Ireland and move the whole family over there with me. For various
reasons, that didn't work out. We stayed in Portland where I opened up shop as
an independent consultant. Finally, after working with a number of wonderful
clients, I decided to accept a job offer from one of them; and I'm once again an
employee.

Probably my most important achievement of 2008 was to completely, 100% quit
smoking cigarettes. I had actually quit in the Fall of 2007, but I was using the
nicotine patch, and it took me longer than it should have to wean myself off of
it. But I did, and I'm now living completely nicotine-free.

I did not, unfortunately, stick to my exercise goals for the year. The new bike
I bought this summer with a plan to ride several time per week has only been out
of the garage a handful of times. In the Fall, I started the 100 Push-ups
program and added on sit-ups, leg curls and calf extensions. I was doing pretty
good for a few weeks, but then my schedule got thrown off when Misty went out of
town, and I never got back on track. Boo.

Of course, no 2008 year-end review would be complete without a record of the
Snowpocalypse which descended upon us during the last half of December. It
almost never snows on the valley floor in Hillsboro or Portland. This year it
not only snowed, but it stuck. We had well over a foot of accumulation by the
house along with a half inch of ice. Since we've no infrastructure for clearing
the roads, everything basically shut down. Of course, I enjoyed the hell out of
it, because it gave me a chance to put the Jeep in 4-lo once or twice.

This was definitely a prosperous year for our family, and we've been able to do
a number of fun extra things such as pay for my friend, Quentin Baker, to fly
out for a few days this fall and for my dad and his wife to come out for a week
during Christmas. We're debt free except for two car payments, and we're
hopefully in a good position to weather the current problems with our economy.

2009 looks like it could be another year of changes. It's definitely going to be
a big change for our country as our new president takes office. Hopefully I'll
be able to bring some more positive change to my individual life as well. I plan
to spend some time tomorrow thinking about my goals and resolutions for the next
year.

For now, good-bye 2008 and happy new-year!
