---
layout: post
title: "34 Weeks to BCCC"
excerpt: |
  ![34 Weeks to BCCC](/images/2017/34-weeks-to-bccc.png)
  
  My goal between now and the end of the year is to maintain a moderate amount
  of fitness and to get my weight and body-fat percentage within a range that I
  think will set me up well to hit my ultimate racing-weight goal. Cyclocross is
  helping to maintain the fitness, but I'm struggling (as usual) with the diet.
---

The "real" training[^realtraining] for [Baker City Cycling Classic][BCCC]
doesn't start until January, but that doesn't mean there is *no* training going
on in the mean time. After all, I certainly don't want to lose all of the
fitness gained from my 2017 season. My goal between now and the end of the year
is to maintain a moderate amount of fitness---so that it is not a total shock to
the system when training starts back up in earnest come January 1st---and to get
my weight and body-fat percentage within a range that I think will set me up
well to hit my ultimate racing-weight goal (170lbs and <= 15% body-fat). I think
that, if I can get down to 180lbs and <= 20% body-fat by the beginning of
December, that will help reduce the expected back-slide on those numbers from
the winter holiday season and planned two-week break from training at the end of
the year.

## Training ##

![2017-10-22 Training Log](/images/2017/training-log-2017-10-22.png)

The training side of things went pretty well this past week. On Tuesday and
Thursday, I completed both of my harder interval sessions on the indoor trainer.
On Tuesday, the plan called for an endurance ride of about an hour, but the
weather was looking nice, so I decided to get outside on the cross bike and hit
a few flat gravel roads in the area. I kept my heart rate in zone 2 as much as I
could, being careful to let my legs recover enough as not to interfere with the
following day's interval session. Thursday's interval session took a lot of me
thinking, "come on, you can do *anything* for one more minute" in order to make
it through the whole session, and I was pretty cooked by the following day. I
ended up skipping Friday's workout and even throttling back my planned
workout/opener for Saturday in order to avoid being overcooked for Sunday's
cross race. I think I made the right call here, and I'll be adjusting the
remainder of my 2017 training plan to follow suit.

Racing cross this year is already showing that it is going to have a big impact
on my overall training. Never before have I pushed myself to go quite so deep
into the pain cave as I seem to do during a cross race. Not only is the nature
of the race (short, lots of turns and terrain changes that force constant
accelerations, etc) such that it requires a lot of intense effort, but the fact
that the course is lined with cheering (and heckling!) teammates and others from
the local racing community really helps push me to perform in ways that I lack
the motivation to do in most road races. Cross also has a nice aspect of the
race being about personal achievement (Did you give it everything you had? How
skillfully were you able to ride the technical sections?) as opposed to road
races where---once you lose contact with the main field---there is sometimes
very little to motivate you to go faster or ride it better, because only the top
10 spots really matter. By looking at the data after each race and seeing just
how hard I can really go when motivated, I seem better able to go deep in my
high-intensity interval workouts on the trainer. I already know I really *can*
do it, so I am not able to use general capability as an excuse to cut a workout
short. Hopefully, the more I accustom myself to pushing through the discomfort
like that, the more I will be able to dig in and make the sometimes painful
efforts that make the difference between finishing with the field or getting
dropped come road-racing season.

## Diet ##

As part of trying to get my weight and body-fat percentage where I want them to
be, I am once again trying to do the [MyFitnessPal][MFP] thing and tracking all
of my food. I'm admittedly bad about following any kind of diet plan. It's
especially hard on rest days, because there tends to be a pretty large
difference between the number of calories I burn on a rest day vs. the rest of
the week, but my appetite tends not to compensate. Interestingly, it's not only
harder to keep my net calories in line; it's also much harder for me to make
healthy choices about the kinds of food I eat on rest days. I think what happens
is I see that I'm inevitably going to go over my daily calorie goal (because my
stomach will be growling at me to eat), and then I convince myself that I might
as well not even bother with today and can just start over tomorrow. I'm going
to try to be more mindful of that this week and attempt to eat healthier, more
nutritious foods even when I'm "blowing my diet" in terms of overall calories
for a given day. As they say, "two wrongs don't make a right," and if you are
going to over-eat, it is still better to do so while consuming healthy foods.

The other thing I plan to do is stop paying so much attention to my daily weight
and body-fat percentage. My body weight, especially, tends to fluctuate pretty
wildly within the scope of a week, by as much as three or four pounds in each
direction due to the specifics of what I've eaten, how much water I've drank or
lost while exercising, or even differences in waste-elimination. Instead of
focusing on each day's numbers, I am going to try just recording the numbers
each morning without looking at them (thanks to a scale that will upload the
data automatically) and then, on Mondays, record my *average* weight and
body-fat percentage for the previous week. What I hope to see is a steady march
toward my goals while removing the negative feedback of the occasional heavy day
that I, personally, find quite discouraging.

## Stats ##

Avg. Weight
: 186.2 lbs (-0.2 lbs)

Avg. Body-Fat
: 22.3% (-1.1%)

Fitness
: 56 CTL (+2)

Fatigue
: 67 ATL (+4)

Form
: 0 TSB (+1)

[^realtraining]: That is, the periodized training cycle from Prep to Race phases
    that culminates with BCCC as my first A race of the year.

[BCCC]: http://www.bakercitycycling.org/BCCC/Home.html
[MFP]: http://www.myfitnesspal.com/
