---
layout: post
title: Baker City or Bust
excerpt: |
  ![35 Weeks Until BCCC](/images/2017/35-weeks-to-bccc.png)
  I had so much fun at this year’s BCCC that I am orienting my 2018 season
  goals around next year’s edition.
---

This past summer, I participated in my first-ever stage race, the [Baker City
Cycling Classic][BCCC]. I helped arrange a large rental house in Baker City for
[Team Oregon][TO] to stay in, and we had maybe 15 or so team members taking up
residence for the long weekend of racing. It was both the most challenging *and*
the most fun road-racing I have done since joining the team. Not only for the
races themselves, but also (maybe even primarily) for the opportunity to hang
out with and learn from some of the much more experienced racers on our team.

## How I Did

As for the races themselves...I didn't do so great. It was partially a lack of
fitness (relative to my competitors), partially not being used to riding at the
much higher elevation, and partially that I went into the weekend slightly
dehydrated---and there was no way to catch up on hydration while also racing
every day in that arid environment.

The race consisted of five separate stages over three days:

### Friday ###

#### Keating Valley Road Race####

This was a 40 mile road race with about 1500 feet of climbing. I was feeling
good as we started off the race, but when we hit the first climb, my heart-rate
shot through the roof *way* beyond what I expected for my power output. I had
never raced at higher elevations before, and didn't realize how extreme the
impact was going to be. I red-lined and got dropped hard (though I at least was
not the *first* person to get droppped.) I rode the rest of the race mostly on
my own, working briefly with a few folks here and there that also got dropped
and subsequently caught by me.

I placed 20th out of 24 starters with a time of 1:54:43 that put me 13:01 behind
the leader (Jason Whitley, also of Team Oregon, who would go on to win the GC
for the weekend.)
   
#### NHOTIC Time Trial ####

The second stage, taking place in the evening, was a one mile, uphill time
trial. I never expected to do well at this one, because at 190 lbs and around
20% body-fat...let's just say going *up* was not my forte. I did the best that I
could, and my lungs were completely on fire by the time I crossed the finish.

I placed 21st out of 24 with a time of 06:31, putting me 02:02 behind the stage
winner. For an uphill time-trial, I was not disappointed with that result.

### Saturday ###

#### Historic Baker City Time Trial ####

Saturday morning started off with an 11 mile individual time trial over
relatively flat terrain. I started with a bit of a disadvantage here, because I
do not own a time-trial bike, and most of my competitors were on time-trial
bikes. Thankfully my 2017 Trek Madone is at least an aero road bike, and I am
comfortable riding in a very aggressive position, although there is
unfortunately no way to even attach clip-on aero bars to its integrated
handlebar/stem combo.

The most memorable part of this stage was the guy who was starting just behind
me (who was on a proper TT bike, wearing a skin-suit and aero helmet, etc)
yelling out, "Run, rabbit, run. Gonna catch you!" as I took off. I mean,
seriously, what an asshole. I was just like, "No shit, Sherlock.". I got the
last laugh, though, because as I was coming down the last stretch of road to the
finish, I passed *him* by, walking his bike to the finish due to a flat. Karma
will kick your ass eventually.

I placed 18th/24 with a time of 27:43, 03:55 behind the stage winner.

#### Tour d'Town Criterium ####

On Saturday evening, it was time for the criterium stage. I had never ridden a
criterium before, and (from what I had heard) this is one of the most dangerous
road-cycling events, so I was pretty nervous going in. Damon and I walked and
rode the course ahead of time to make sure we got a good look at all of the
corners and knew where we wanted to be positioned. I think that I probably
*could* have done better at this stage, but given that I was already *way* out
of contention for anything overall and didn't think I had much of a shot at
placing in this event, I let myself hang towards the back of the pack, so that I
wouldn't end up making some rookie mistake, crashing, and taking out someone who
had a real shot at things.

I ended up being pulled prior to the final lap (which they do for safety if a
rider is going to get lapped by the leaders prior to the finish). I placed
20th/24 with an official time of 26:21, which was 01:16 behind the stage winner.

Later in the evening, I got to be a spectator on the sidewalk as the Pro/1/2
fields raced. This was also my first time watching a criterium in person, and
the speed with which these men and women went by was astounding. With other
fields, it seemed like you could have an entire conversation in between watching
the leaders come around each lap, but with these folks, you barely had time to
get a few sentences in before they came whizzing by again. Simply amazing. But
it did underscore the danger of this event: one of our teammates crashed out
hard enough to completely destroy his bike. (Thankfully his own injuries were
less severe; he even rode Sunday's stage on a borrowed bike.)

### Sunday - Tour d'Horn Road Race ###

On Sunday morning, it was time to line up for the event's queen stage, an 84
mile road race with over 6.6k feet of climbing---the majority of that in one
final, brutal climb up to Anthony Lakes.

The first part of this stage was identical to stage 1. I already knew I wouldn't
be doing well on the stage, given the way I got dropped on stage 1 and adding
the fatigue from the previous four stages. We had our man, Jason Whitley, in the
leader's jersey to start this stage, so Damon and I both decided we would work
for him as long as we possibly could at the beginning. This turned out to be the
right call, because other teams were doing their best to keep Jason on the front
and wasting energy during the relatively long and mild start up and over the
(same) first climb. Damon and I went to the front right away, and we set the
pace all the way to the base of that climb, keeping Jason from having to come to
the front or worry about chasing anything down. (Jason later told me that other
riders were asking him if we were just going to pull all day.)

I peeled off at the start of the first climb after lifting the pace quite a bit,
and let the better climbers get around me. At this point I thought "job done for
the day" and was going to be content with even finishing this brutal stage. To
my surprise, I managed to stay in contact over the climb this time, and I did
not have quite the same "system shock" reaction that I did in stage 1.

As we hit the long descent, I was in the back of the group. Between my weight,
the fact that I can get very aero, and my generally good descending skills,
being in the back here was super annoying. Most of the pack was on the brakes
way too much, and I kept having to slow behind them, just waiting for someone to
touch wheels ahead and cause a pile-up. At this point, I thanked past self for
going road-tubeless with 26c tires and decided to pass the field on the gravel
shoulder as we descended. Once I got past them, I was able to easily accelerate
away from the field for the day's first breakaway attempt (I knew it wouldn't
last; I just wanted to have a safe descent.) One other rider grabbed my wheel,
and we worked together to put a descent gap on the field over the remainder of
the descent and a couple of rollers. Then, at the lowest point before the
penultimate climbing section, we were caught, and the field paused for a nature
break.

At this point, I had burned my matches, and I watched the field slip away from
me as we hit the next big climb. I continued to ride on my own for quite some
time, but I ended up running out of water in between the first and second feed
zones. Because I was so far off the back at this point, and we were the last
field to start, I didn't have any vehicle support behind me to provide water.
There would be a sweeper car at the end of the day, but it would probably be
hours behind me. I decided that I did not want to risk sitting in the desert
heat on a shadeless section of road for over an hour with no water, so I called
it quits at feed-2, jumped into a vehicle, and caught a ride to the finish line.
I was disappointed to DNF after working so hard for the previous four-and-a-half
stages, but it was the right call to make for my own safety.

## Baker City 2018 ##

Despite the disappointing ending, I had so much fun at this year's BCCC that I
am orienting my 2018 season goals around next year's edition.

My top goals for the season are:

* Finish every stage of the 2018 BCCC.

* Not be dropped by the field on any stage prior to the final climb on Sunday
  (where the entire field seems to break up as everyone just tackles the
  grueling climb at whatever pace they can manage.)

* [Stretch Goal] Place at least 3rd in the criterium stage, which is most likely
  the kind of racing I am best suited to given that my top-end power is pretty
  good (it's my FTP:body-weight ratio that is my biggest limiter.)

My primary plan for meeting these goals is:

1. Get my body weight down to 175 lbs or lower with <= 15% body fat

2. Stick to a regimented training plan for 2018 that includes a lot more
   structured training on the indoor trainer than I typically use once the
   weather is nice enough to ride outside.
   
3. Spend at least 1 week ahead of BCCC training at altitude, so that my body is
   better acclimated to it.

The reason for #2 is that the power-controlled training (I use [Trainer
Road][TR] along with a [Wahoo Kickr][WK]) will help ensure that I am adequately
training to improve the areas that are most holding back my performance. Outdoor
riding will primarily be long team rides on Saturdays, Tuesday-night racing at
PIR starting in mid-April, and the occsional "it's too nice today to *not* ride
outside" recovery ride interspersed with planned training.

Between now and the beginning of the 2018 plan year, I am keeping myself in
shape with cyclocross racing on the weekends and some interval work on the
trainer during the week.

### Current Status ###

![35 Weeks Until BCCC](/images/2017/35-weeks-to-bccc.png)

Weight
: 183.9 lbs

Body Fat
: 23.1%

Fitness
: 52 CTL

Fatigue
: 54 ATL

Form
: -1 TSB


[BCCC]: http://www.bakercitycycling.org/BCCC/Home.html
[TO]: https://www.teamoregon.org/
[TR]: http://trainerroad.com
[WK]: http://www.wahoofitness.com/devices/bike-trainers
