---
layout: post
title: "Race Report: BCCC 2018 Day 1"
excerpt: |
  I'm back for my second year in a row, racing as number 420 in the Baker City
  Cycling Classic. After dropping out of the race on the last stage in 2017,
  because I got dropped early on and then ran out of water between feed-1 and
  feed-2, I've spent the last year training like mad, so that I could come back
  and actually make it to the top of that last climb on that last day.

---

I drove out to Baker City on Sunday afternoon. Last year, I came out on the
Thursday before the race, and that was just not enough time for me to acclimate
to the higher altitude and drier air; I started off a little dehydrated and was
never able to catch up. This year I am fortunate enough to be able to work
remotely, so I decided that I'd come out early and give myself a few days to
relax and acclimate. I rode the course for stage 1 on Tuesday at a moderate
pace, but other than that and a brief opener on Thursday, I forced myself to
save it for the weekend. That wasn't easy, as part of me kept saying, "you
aren't trained enough; get just one more workout in." The fact of the matter is,
though, that if the last six months of 14-hour-a-week training weren't enough to
get me there, nothing I could do in the week before the race was going to make a
difference other than to tire me out. So I forced myself to take the time to
recover and be ready to go on Friday morning.

### Stage 1: Keating Valley Road Race

On Friday morning, I felt *good*. I did a small warm-up with Jorge out near the
finish line, then we cruised into town for an espresso before the start. Not
long after, we were lined up with the other 4/5 men and ready to go; I think we
have about 20 people in our field. We got the speech from the official and off
we went for a *very* chill roll-out. Planet X has 5 guys in our field; it's
their race to lose, so everyone was content to let them sit on the front until
we hit the first climb over the ridge before dropping down into the valley.

At the climb, it was time to go, and a few people attacked off the front. Now,
last year, I got dropped right at this spot, because the toll of elevation and
dehydration just made my heart rate skyrocket, and I popped hard. I'm very happy
to say that I made it up to the top with the front of the field this year. I'd
like to say "easily," but that would be a lie. The attacks were hard, and at one
point I was putting out over 800 watts just to stay attached!

But then we had the long cruise down to the valley floor, and it really is the
downhills where I shine, because an 180-pound guy on an aero-bike who is
comfortable descending and knows how to get low on the bike drops like a rock. I
barely had to pedal and was passing people; meanwhile Jorge said he was going
into the red on the descents just to stay with the group.

We made the right hand turn at the bottom and started heading toward the
short-but-terrible gravel section. Having ridden the course on Tuesday, I
already knew that the gravel was going to be a real shit-show. Apparently it had
fresh gravel put down about a week before the race, so while it was more of a
dirt road last year, this year it was deep and loose. Now, I like riding gravel
on my gravel bike, but on a road bike, this was absolutely no fun. I knew I
wanted to be in the front when we hit the gravel, because the good lines were
few and far between, and I didn't want to get stuck behind a mishap or just a
popped rider. I think I may have moved up a little too soon, though and taken
the wind a little too long, because about half way through the gravel section, I
needed a match that wasn't there.

As we hit a left hand turn at the mid-point of the gravel, the rider in front of
me started to lose traction and swept right into my line. I had nowhere to go,
so I had to try to slow down and prepare to bail as safely as I could.
Fortunately, neither one of us went down, but it was just enough to cause me to
lose contact with the lead group. I tried to catch them before we hit the
pavement again, but just didn't have the legs at that moment (or maybe it was
the nerve; I'm not really sure.) When we got to the pavement and turned into the
wind, I considered trying to sprint up and catch the back of the group, but the
big climb out of the valley comes right on the heels of the gravel, and I knew
that it would take so much to catch them at that point (where we also turned
into a stiff headwind) that I would just lose them right away on the climb and
be totally gassed for the day. I already knew what wattage I can hold for a
20-minute climb, so I decided to just keep it steady.

My guess is that if I hadn't lost the lead group in the gravel, I would have
made it up the climb with all but the few who managed to get away off the front.
But being by myself in the wind meant that the lead group was gradually
stretching out their lead. That said, I only got passed on the climb by one
person (a great climber, but small enough to have a lot of trouble in the
gravel) and I did pass up a few guys who blew up trying to hang with the front.

The only real issue I had is that my calves started cramping near the top of the
climb. The odd thing was that they only cramped if I eased off on the power;
they seized up if I dropped below about 220 watts, but it I stayed above that,
they were fine. So maybe it was a good thing?

I came across the line at 6:14 down. Not too bad. Last year it was 13:01.

### Stage 2: Oregon Trail Uphill Time Trial

This stage is a short-but-steep 1-mile individual time trial course. Now, my
goals this year are to finish the race (I DNF'ed the last stage in 2017) and to
place in the criterium. I'm *easily* going to lose 30 minutes on the final climb
on Sunday, so I'm not racing for the GC (general classification; the lowest
cumulative time for the weekend). Since I want to save my legs for the criterium
tomorrow, I planned to soft-pedal this stage. Why waste energy on something that
doesn't help you towards your goals at all?

I declined the hold at the start line. I even told the guys behind me just to
let me know which side they wanted to pass on. I put the bike in my 36/28 and
took off from the start gate as though I was going for a leisurely ride on the
bike trail with little kids. I pedaled that mile going as slow as I felt like I
could comfortably do it. At one point, Dublin came jogging along side me, so I
slowed down a bit more to have a chat.

Last year, there was a mix of being mad that I got dropped on the first stage
and also a desire to really try at *everything*, because I didn't really know
what parts I would be good at (it was my first stage race). I turned myself
*inside out* trying to get to the top of this climb as fast as I could. When I
got to the top, I could barely breathe. I must have been coughing for ten
minutes at the finish. I was sure that this year my time would be nowhere *near*
what I accomplished in 2017.

It turns out I did it in just about the same amount of time. `¯\_(ツ)_/¯`

(According to Strava, it took me 4 minutes longer last year, but that must be an
issue with the segment, because my official time was pretty close to what I did
this year.) I don't have the official time yet for this year, but to be anywhere
close to what I did last year and yet not even break a sweat is a good feeling.

I plan to go easy in tomorrow morning's time trial as well. Without a TT bike,
there's no chance of a stage win, and--again--I don't really care about the GC,
so the TT is just something I have to get through in order to make it to the
criterium in the evening.
