---
layout: post
title: Sky Departure will be Good for Pro Cycling
excerpt: |
  Whether they find new sponsorship at the end of 2019 or dissolve completely, I
  think we'll find that the era of Sky-dominance has drawn to a close. 

---

While I was surprised to hear that [Sky will stop sponsoring its cycling team at
the end of 2019][velonews], I can't say I'm very disappointed about the news.
Don't get me wrong: I'm not one of the typical Sky-haters that seem to
continually bad-mouth the team no matter what they do. I think that the team has
done a superb job of demonstrating the value of combining a rigorous adherence
to process with constant refinement based on evidence about what does and does
not improve performance. Given my line of work, I'm bound to appreciate that
approach. But—the fact of the matter is—after so many years of Sky's formulaic
dominance over professional cycling—things have gotten...well...boring.

It's not Team Sky's fault. They were fortunate to have sponsorship that was
willing to pour a massive amount of cash into the sport, and they used that
resource to great effect. Perhaps if there had been at least a couple of other
teams with that same level of funding, it would have turned into something very
exciting to watch. Unfortunately, when they are the only ones who can throw that
much money around, it's difficult for anyone else to get into the game. It's
gotten to the point where we just know: if Team Sky really wants to throw
everything at winning a particular race, they will.

With the departure of their title sponsor, it's certainly possible that the team
will continue on past 2019, but I find it highly unlikely that they will find
the same deep pockets available to them. Given the number of riders on the squad
who could each compete for grand-tour leadership, the chances that a new sponsor
will have the budget to keep them all together is highly unlikely, and I am sure
that other teams have already started contacting the Sky riders like sharks
circling a wounded whale. Whether they find new sponsorship at the end of 2019
or dissolve completely, I think we'll find that the era of Sky-dominance has
drawn to a close.

Which means that in 2020, for the first time in many, many years, we might see
some truly epic battles for the grand tour jerseys. Personally, I can't wait.

[velonews]: https://www.velonews.com/2018/12/news/sky-to-lose-main-sponsor-after-2019-season_482173
