---
layout: page
title: "FReePG 1.0"
comments: true
sharing: true
footer: true
published: false
---

## Free-form Role-playing Game ##

FReePG is a light-weight set of rules for running a fantasy role-playing game. I
wanted to run an RPG in which all of my kids could participate, including my
younger kids who weren't yet able to read and digest the many rules involved in
creating and running a character for systems such as [Dungeons and Dragons](http://www.wizards.com/DND/).

In FReePG, the most important thing is imagination. My goal was to put as few
rules in place as possible to help arbitrate "fairness" and then let kids'
natural ability to role-play shine. I intended the game as a gateway to more
advanced RPGs, but I've found that—as long as you have a creative group to play
with—it can be fun to play this way no matter how experienced you are with other
RPGs.

The rules presented below should be read and well-understood by the Game Master
(GM) who will be running the game. While players are certainly encouraged to
read them as well, they may be overwhelming for younger players or people
completely new to table-top role-playing games. See "Introducing New Players"
below for advice on teaching new gamers to play.

## What You Need ##

* *A battle grid* - Any grid with 1-inch squares will do. I use the vinyl,
  grids for use with wet-erase markers (for less waste) but large sheets of
  paper with pre-printed grids would make it easier to revisit previous
  locations without having to redraw maps.

* *Markers* - Used to draw maps. Get either wet-erase or regular markers,
  depending on what type of battle grid you are using. Having several colors
  available will make your maps easier to read than if you only have black.

* *Pencils* - One for each player and the GM.

* *Index cards* - You could probably use regular paper, too, but index cards
  seem to hold up a bit better at a table with young kids and in between
  sessions. These are used for character sheets, special items and keeping track
  of combat.

* *Flat marbles* - for keeping track of health points. Hash marks on the
  character sheets will also work, but the marbles (or similar tokens) are a bit
  more tactile and easier to understand for the younger kids.

* *Character Tokens* - These are for marking the position of each character on
  the battle grid. You could just use [plain tokens](/blog/2012/01/01/rpg-character-tokens/),
  but younger kids (in particular) will be much more excited about playing if
  you have miniatures appropriate to the genre of the game. If you already play
  D&D, Descent, etc., then you may have appropriate miniatures.  Otherwise, any
  figures where a human-sized creature fills about 1 square on the grid and can
  stand on its own will work. (Be sure they are stable when standing—I tried
  using cheap soldier figures once, and they kept falling over.)

* *20-sided die* - You will need at least one, 20-sided die. It's best to have
  one for each player, and the GM may want to have several in order to speed up
  game-play a bit.

## Creating Characters ##

Characters in FReePG are limited only to the player's imagination with the
exception of a few basics that are common to all player characters. There are no
defined races or classes—the player can be any kind of creature they wish, and
the way they choose to play and advance the character determines the character's
role in the world.

### Basic Statistics ###

Each player character starts off with 40 health points, 100 gold pieces, a
movement speed of 6 squares per round and no skill bonuses. To create a new
character, simply write the names of both the character and the player on the
top of an index card, and then write in the following statistics:

```
Joe the Archer
Player: John Doe

Gold:      100
Health:     40
Mana:        5
Speed:       6

Melee:      +0
Ranged:     +0
Armor:      +0
Stealth:    +0
Perception: +0
Strength:   +0
Healing:    +0
Diplomacy:  +0
```

#### Gold ####

Gold coins are the only form of currency used in the game (you could call it
something else if "gold" doesn't work well with the genre you are playing). Each
character starts with 100 gold coins, which they can either spend immediately on
advancement or equipment or save to use later.

#### Health ####

During combat, a character loses health points when it is hit by an attack. When
the character's health reaches 0 points, the character is dying (see "Dying").
Health is fully restored after an extended rest (see "Resting"). Health can be
restored between extended rests with the *Healing* skill.

##### Stunned #####

When a creature takes damage in a single round (even if it results from multiple
attacks) equal to or grater than 1/2 of its maximum health points, it is
stunned. A stunned creature can only take one *major*, *minor* or *move* action
(see "Combat") during the following round. If a creature becomes stunned during
its turn, its turn ends immediately.

##### Dying #####

When a player character is reduced to 0 health points or less, it is dying. The
character can take no actions until its health points are greater than 0. A
dying character rolls a d20 on its turn. If the roll is 9 or lower for three
turns before being healed, the character dies. A character can have negative
health points as a result of the attack that killed it, but it does not take
further damage once it is dying.

A dead character can be resurrected only outside of a combat encounter.  A
resurrected character has 1/2 of its maximum hit points and 0 mana. If the body
can be retrieved, the character retains all of its equipment and treasure. Skill
bonuses are retained at a cost of 100gp per +1 bonus, which can be paid by anyone
in the party (this can only be paid at the time of resurrection). Resurrection
can occur at any time (outside of combat), so the party can choose to wait if
enough funds are not available to restore the character's skills to the desired
level.

Creatures other than player characters permanently die as soon as their health
points reach 0, and they cannot usually be resurrected.

#### Mana ####

Mana points determine the amount of magic that a creature has access to. Mana
can be spent to add bonuses to either speed or skill checks. The creature gets a
+1 bonus to the check (or 1 additional square of movement) for each point of
mana spent. Mana is fully restored after an extended rest (see "Resting").

#### Speed ####

During combat encounters, each character is able to move a number of squares
equal to their speed. (Each square represents about five feet.) The character
may also choose to run (see "Combat"), in which case the character can move a
number of squares up to twice their speed.

##### Special Movement #####

* *Flying* - If a creature is able to fly, it requires 1 "square" of movement
  for each five feet of altitude change it makes. If a creature is either
  stunned or dying (see "Health") while in flight, the creature falls. A
  creature that ends its turn in mid-air does not fall; it is in the same
  position at the beginning of its next turn unless another creature's action
  causes it to fall.

* *Climbing* - Like flying, climbing requires 1 "square" of movement for each
  five feet of altitude change. Additionally, the character must succeed at a
  Strength skill check to avoid falling. The difficulty of the check would vary
  depending on the type of surface being climbed.

* *Falling* - When a creature falls, the creature loses one health point for
  each five feet that it fell. 

* *Difficult Terrain* - Any difficult terrain, such as a steep slope, muddy bog,
  ice, etc. causes creatures walking over it to move at half speed. (The GM
  should feel free to further reduce speed for extremely difficult terrain.)

* *Swimming* - Creatures can move through standing water at their normal
  movement speed. If the water is moving, their speed may be adjusted by the
  GM depending on the speed of the water, and whether the creature is moving
  against or with the current.

#### Skill Checks ####

While playing the game, whether in combat or during exploration, characters will
face challenges that require a die-roll to determine success. Skill checks are
performed by rolling a d20, adding any relevant bonuses or penalties, then
comparing the result to a "difficulty check" (DC). If the result is equal to or
greater than the DC, then the character succeeds at the attempt.

Some DCs are numbers fixed by the GM. For instance, climbing a brick wall
requires a *strength* check, and the GM may set the DC to 20. The DC is the same
for every creature that attempts to scale the wall.

Other skill checks are made as opposed checks, meaning that the DC of the check
is determined by another character's die roll and bonuses. For instance, Durzum
is trying to sneak past an ogre to get to its stash of gold. He uses his
*stealth* skill, for which he has a +3 bonus. He rolls a 12 on a d20 for a total
of 15.  The ogre makes a *perception* check with a +1 bonus. It rolls a 13 for a
total of 14. Since Durzum's stealth check is higher than the ogre's perception
check, Durzum is able to sneak past the ogre.

#### Skill Training ####

Characters can get bonuses to these rolls through either skill training or item
enhancements. While item enhancements are only applied when an enhanced item is
actually used (see "Equipment"), skill-training bonuses are permanent and are
combined with any applicable item enhancement.

Skill bonuses are acquired by purchasing training from a skill-master. Most
sizable towns would have a skill-master for any of the skills, but this is left
to the GM's discretion.

The character must pay the skill-master for training in a skill. The cost of the
training depends on the bonus level, and it uses a non-linear scale (Fibonacci
sequence) starting at 100 gold coins for a +1 bonus. The table below shows the
cost up through a +10 bonus, but there is no upper limit; just follow the
pattern to determine the cost of higher bonuses.

```
 +1:  100gp (   100gp total)
 +2:  200gp (   300gp total)
 +3:  300gp (   600gp total)
 +4:  500gp ( 1,100gp total)
 +5:  800gp ( 1,900gp total)
 +6: 1300gp ( 3,200gp total)
 +7: 2100gp ( 5,300gp total)
 +8: 3400gp ( 8,700gp total)
 +9: 5500gp (14,200gp total)
+10: 8900gp (23,100gp total)
```

##### Melee #####

The melee skill dictates a character's ability to fight with swords, axes,
staffs and other weapons that do not leave the attacker's hands during combat.
Melee combat is always limited to creatures in adjacent squares. 

The DC for a melee attack is determined by the target's *armor* check as an
opposed check.

##### Ranged #####

The ranged skill is related to attacks with projectile weapons such as bows or
slings and thrown weapons such as daggers or axes. Ranged attacks always incur a
-1 penalty to the skill check for each square further than adjacent the attacker
is from the target. The check incurs an additional -3 penalty if the target has
partial cover, e.g. it is behind a penetrable barrier such as a light curtain or
foliage. The attacker must have a straight line of sight to the target. Line of
sight can be traced through adjacent allies, but not through enemies.

The DC for a ranged attack is determined by the target's *armor* skill as an
opposed check.

##### Armor #####

The armor skill represents a creatures ability to use armor effectively as well
as their natural defense. When attacked, the creature makes an armor skill
check, and the resulting number determines the DC of the attack roll.

##### Stealth #####

Stealth is used to avoid detection. A creature that is moving takes a -1 penalty
to its stealth checks. Stealth is an opposed check against perception.

##### Perception #####

Perception is used to locate hidden items or creatures that are using their
stealth skill. Hidden items (such as traps or secret doors) have fixed DCs,
while creatures require an opposed stealth check. If a creature is not actively
searching for something, it uses a passive perception check of 10 plus its
perception skill bonus.

##### Strength #####

Strength checks are used to determine the success of any athletic endeavors such
as jumping over a chasm, climbing a wall, or moving heavy objects. Opposed
strength checks are used if one creature is trying to hold another creature
against its will.

##### Healing #####

The healing skill is used to restore health points to a single target creature
(possibly one's self). The DC for a healing check is always 10, and the number
of health points restored is equal to the result minus 10.

## Magic ##

Magic spells are limited only to the players' imaginations. The player simply
describes a spell they are trying to cast, and the GM determined an appropriate
DC. Depending on the nature of the spell, the GM may allow a relevant skill
bonus to be added to the roll, and the character can also spend mana to provide
an additional bonus. A good rule of thumb is that the DC should be `10 + (S *
P)`, where S is the number of squares affected and P is the "points" of damage,
healing, or other modifier as deemed appropriate by the GM.

## Combat ##

At the beginning of a combat encounter, all creatures involved roll initiative
on a d20. The turn order proceeds in order from highest to lowest initiative.

On each creature's turn, it may perform (any, all or none of) the following
actions in any order:

1) **Move** - Move a number of squares up to its speed. It can also run if it
did not attack. Movement can also be split up, i.e. it can move 3 squares,
attack, and then move another 3 squares.

2) **Major** - Attack or perform another major action such as pushing a boulder,
grabbing an enemy, healing itself or an adjacent target, etc.

3) **Minor** - Equip a weapon or shield, consume a potion, or pick up an item.

4) **Free** - Speak a few sentences to other creatures. Drop an item.

The creature can also choose to delay its turn, at which point it will be added
to the end of the initiative order. (It will remain in the new position for
future rounds.)

## Resting ##

Characters can choose to rest in between combat encounters. After an extended
rest of at least 6 hours, health points and mana are restored to their maximum
amounts.

The party must make a "rest" check for each hour of rest at a DC determined by
the DM to avoid being attacked while resting. The DC can range from 0 for a very
safe area to 20 for an extremely dangerous area, and no bonuses are applied to
the check.

If the party sets a watch rotation, then the characters on watch can make
perception checks against any sneaking enemies during their turn at watch.

## Equipment ##

### Mundane Equipment ###

Mundane equipment (items that provide no special bonuses or health/mana
restoration) can be treated in a couple of ways depending on the group of
players. With younger kids, it's OK to not keep track of it at all: who cares if
they suddenly use a never-before-seen battleaxe in the middle of combat; it
doesn't have any game-affecting benefit over the sword they were just using!

On the other hand, more experienced players may prefer to track all equipment
and require it to be purchased or found during exploration. If you go this
route, you may want to adjust the starting money to allow characters to
purchase basic adventuring equipment.

Characters can describe mundane equipment however they like, as it does not
affect the mechanics of the game. Barring any explicit skill bonuses, the
ranger's light, leather armor protects her just as much as the knight's steel
plate. Mundane equipment is all about adding flavor for the players.

### Enhanced Equipment ###

Some items provide specific benefits to a characters abilities or statistics. A
magic sword might provide a +2 bonus to melee attacks, while a dragon-bone
helmet may add a +5 armor bonus when it is worn. An amulet of health could
provide the user with 10 additional health points, while a wizard's staff adds 5
mana points to its wielder's pool.

Enhanced items can be found as treasure, or they can be purchased (and sold!) in
most towns. The value of a magic item is 100gp per 1 point of bonus that it
confers (so that magic sword would cost 200gp, and the amulet of health would
cost 1,000gp).

Enhanced items must be equipped in order to provide their benefits—that
dragon-bone helmet doesn't do much good sitting in a pack! If it's a weapon that
confers an attack bonus, the bonus is only applied to attacks *with that
weapon*.

### Potions ###

Magic potions that provide restoration of health or mana or one-time bonuses to
skill checks can be found or purchased. Potions of health cost 20gp per health
point restored. Potions of mana cost 50gp per mana point restored. Potions that
provide one-time bonuses to specific skill-checks cost 10gp per point.

## Monsters ##

## Traps ##

## Introducing New Players ##
